Data Warehousing Assignment

This problem set consists of two data modeling scenarios. You will be asked to analyze the strengths and weak-
nesses of some design alternatives for each scenario. Short answers are fine – one or two paragraphs per question

would be an appropriate length.
Scenario I In this scenario, we are interested in modeling student enrollment in Stanford courses. We would like to
answer questions such as:
• Which courses are most popular? Which instructors are most popular?
• Which courses are most popular among graduate students? Undergraduates? • Are there courses for which the
assigned classrooms is too large or too small?
We are planning to have a course enrollment fact table with the grain of one row per student per course enrollment.
In other words, if a student enrolls in 5 courses there will be 5 rows for that student in the fact table. We will use the
following dimensions: Course, Department, Student, Term, Classroom, and Instructor. There will be a single fact
measurement column, EnrollmentCount. Its value will always be equal to 1.
We are considering several options for dealing with the Instructor dimension. Interesting attributes of instructors
include FirstName, LastName, Title (e.g. Assistant Professor), Department, and TenuredFlag. The difficulty is that a
few courses (less than 5%) have multiple instructors. Thus it appears we cannot include the Instructor dimension in
the fact table because it doesn’t match the intended grain. Here are the options under consideration:
OptionA
Option B
Option C
ModifytheInstructordimensionbyaddingspecialrowsrepresentinginstructorteams.Forexample,CS276ais taught by
Manning and Raghavan, so there will be an Instructor row representing “Manning/Raghavan” (as well as separate
rows for Manning and Raghavan, assuming that they sometimes teach courses as sole instructors). In this way, the
Instructor dimension becomes true to the grain and we can include it in the fact table.
Change the grain of the fact table to be one row per student enrollment per course per instructor. For example, there
will be two fact rows for each student enrolled in CS 276a, one that points to Manning as an instructor and one that
points to Raghavan. However, each of the two rows will have a value of 0.5 in the EnrollmentCount field instead of
a value of 1, in order to allow the fact to aggregate properly. (Enrollments are “allocated” equally among the
multiple instructors.)
Create two fact tables. The first has the grain of one row per student enrollment per course and doesn’t include the
Instructor dimension. The second has the grain of one row per student enrollment per course per instructor and
includes the Instructor dimension (as well as all the other dimensions). Unlike Option B, the value of

EnrollmentCount will be 1 for all rows in the second fact. Tell warehouse users to use the second fact table for
queries involving attributes of the instructor dimension and the first fact table for all other queries.
Please answer the following questions.
Question 1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of each option?
Question 2. Which option would you choose and why?
Question 3. Would your answer to Question 2 be different if the majority of classes had multiple instructors? How
about if only one or two classes had multiple instructors? (Explain your answer.)
Question 4. [OPTIONAL] Can you think of another reasonable alternative design besides Options A, B, and C? If
so, what are the advantages and disadvantages of your alternative design?
Scenario II In this scenario, we are building a data warehouse for an online brokerage company. The company
makes money by charging commissions when customers buy and sell stocks. We are planning to have a Trades fact
table with the grain of one row per stock trade. We will use the following dimensions: Date, Customer, Account,
Security (i.e. which stock was traded), and TradeType.
The company’s data analysts have told us that they have developed two customer scoring techniques that are used
extensively in their analyses.
· Each customer is placed into one of nine Customer Activity Segments based on their frequency of
transactions, average transaction size, and recency of transactions.
· EachcustomerisassignedaCustomerProfitabilityScorebasedontheprofitsearnedasaresultofthatcustomer’s
trades. The score can be either 1,2,3,4, or 5, with 5 being the most profitable.
These two scores are frequently used as filters or grouping attributes in queries. For example:
· How many trades were placed in July by customers in each customer activity segment?
· What was the total commission earned in each quarter of 2003 on trades of IBM stock by customers
with a profitability score of 4 or 5?
There are a total of 100,000 customers, and scores are recalculated every three months. The activity level or
profitability level of some customers changes over time, and users are very interested in understanding how
and why this occurs.
We are considering several options for dealing with the customer scores:
OptionA Option B Option C
Option D
ThescoresareattributesoftheCustomerdimension.Whenscoreschange,theoldscoreisoverwrittenwiththe new score
(Type 1 Slowly Changing Dimension).

The scores are attributes of the Customer dimension. When scores change, new Customer dimension rows are
created using the updated scores (Type 2 Slowly Changing Dimension).
The scores are stored in a separate CustomerScores dimension which contains 45 rows, one for each combi- nation
of activity and profitability scores. The Trades fact table includes a foreign key to the CustomerScores dimension.
The scores are stored in a CustomerScores outrigger table which contains 45 rows. The Customer dimension
includes a foreign key to the outrigger table (but the fact table does not). When scores change, the foreign key
column in the Customer table is updated to point to the correct outrigger row.
Please answer the following questions.
Question 5. What are the strengths and weaknesses of each option?
Question 6. Which option would you choose and why?
Question 7. Would your answer to Question 6 be different if the number of customers and/or the time interval
between score recalculations was much larger or much smaller? (Explain your answer.)
Question 8. [OPTIONAL] Can you think of another reasonable alternative design besides Options A, B, C, and D?
If so, what are the advantages and disadvantages of your alternative design?
